---
title: Why I quit Anki & thoughts about pitch accent
---

For the past two years, Anki has been a fairly significant part of my
life. It was a consistent part of my day throughout the pandemic and
stayed with me as I moved to college. I managed to set a pretty decent
streak of around 480 days on the program, and I wrote another [[https://esrh.me/posts/2022-02-17-400-days-of-spaced-repetition.html][post]] in
February about my experiences with Anki in general.

In August, I moved to Japan to work on a research internship at NTT,
and it's mad me rethink my Anki habit. Currently, I don't do Anki
regularly, but still occasionally catch up on a deck or two once every
few weeks. Here are a few extremely shallow and obvious insights:

* You don't actually need to know that many words
Shockingly, you DON'T have to memorize thousands of rare archaic words
with a fancy spaced repetition program to order food at a restaurant!
Who could've guessed...

With respect to work, it's definitely important to learn words in your
specific domain, but if your domain is technology-related like mine,
then conversations end up being half English anyway. Investing time
into getting really good at converting technical english words into
native-sounding Japan-glish has had extremely high returns for me.

A LOT of words currently in my primary mining deck are from older
stories I typically read on [[https://www.aozora.gr.jp/][aozora]], and unsurprisingly these words
have practically zero value except for occasionally impressing people
with cool sounding words. Currently, I don't see any value in
preserving my memory of these words.

* Immersion is spaced repetition
Probably the biggest reason I don't find using Anki appealing anymore
is because I realized that actually using the language on a daily
basis is in some ways also a form of spaced repetition. You'll hear
the words that you actually need to remember over and over again, and
at the end of the day, you don't need to remember something you've
only heard once in your life.

I think it would really be quite sad to continue grinding out reviews
while you could instead engage with the language by /going outside!/

* Speaking fluently is tricky
Having the opportunity to use Japanese a lot has made me quite aware
of the ideas of an "English-brain" and a "Japanese-brain."

There's a kind of zone I sometimes experience after immersing AND
speaking exclusively Japanese for a while where I instantly comprehend
what someone is saying, and think about my response in Japanese as
well. Typically, this only happens with simple small-talk
conversations, as thinking about anything even mildly technical forces
my brain into English nearly immediately.

Similarly, after speaking or typing English for a while, I find myself
thinking in English and having to translate back and forth fairly
often. For instance, I think exclusively in English while programming
and read English documentation, and I've noticed that speaking
Japanese immediately after is unusually difficult and choppy.

I imagine this issue will probably get better with time, but I believe
that it'll take specifically speaking more to reduce the inertia that
comes with moving from thinking in English to thinking in Japanese.

As things stand, I'm personally not particularly happy with my
speaking ability in Japanese. Part of this is because of extremely mid
pitch accent which I'll cover shortly, but also because of the
uncomfortable feeling of my brain straining to function in English
during even mildly complicated conversations that need any critical
thinking at all.
* Pitch accent
I first became interested in pitch accent last summer. In case you're
not familiar with the idea, it's essentially where words in Japanese
fall into one of four categories based on how pitch varies across the
word. Check out this [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Japanese_pitch_accent][Wikipedia]] article for a basic overview.

I can confirm from my experience at least, that pitch is /extremely/
important. Phonetics and pitch together are by far (compared to say,
how comprehensible/fluent you are) more important to sound native-like
and to make people think you're better than you are.

By phonetics I of course mean your actual mouth position and
individual sound accuracy, which is definitely the most important
component of pronunciation but really doesn't take too long to learn
if you put your mind to it. Think of it like the kana of
pronunciation: essential, but you can probably learn it in a week or
two.

Pitch on the other hand, is like kanji: thousands of words that you
have to brute-force memorize until your brain starts to pick up on
some patterns to help you out. As a beginner English-native, you're in
for a world of hurt.

Getting perfect pitch for even just the most common words has HUGE
returns to how you sound to natives. If there's even a small
possibility you'll have to speak to native Japanese people, I believe
that learning pitch is super essential. I can't claim to be really
good at it, but I had an interesting idea last summer to acquire pitch
more effectively which I believe is original, and I've had decent results.

** Step 1: Learning to hear pitch
This is the common step to all pitch approaches. As an English native
speaker, your brain isn't really "tuned" to pay attention to pitch
accent. The "native-ness" of a word's pronunciation is
typically unaffected by pitch and instead determined by [[https://www.yaxaccent.com/magazine/the-english-stress-system][stress]].

The typically recommended approach is to use https://kotu.io/ to
build up your pitch recognition. I did this, but I don't believe it's
really necessary. What is necessary though, is first

1. Learning about pitch
2. Focusing really intently on slow-spoken Japanese

For instance, I found it helpful to listen to readings of children's
stories and mentally classify the pitch of every word I heard.
** Step 2: Memorizing pitch patterns and transform rules

The classic approach to this is typically just to read something like
the NHK accent dictionary. While I'm sure that might work, I came up
with a slightly different idea.

Japanese learning in general traditionally also uses textbooks and
focuses on memorizing rules, but so far I've learned the language
using immersion and natural content. What if the same approach worked
for pitch acquisition?

Similarly, using word-front Anki cards might be detrimental for
beginner learners because they lack the context that's necessary for
one to use that word naturally. The alternative is sentence-front
cards, which I used extensively while starting out.

My idea was to instead of memorizing the pitch of words individually,
to try to memorize the pitch of whole sentences at a time. I created a
[[https://ankiweb.net/shared/info/1928141023][deck]] based on this idea, using source code you can find [[https://github.com/eshrh/sentence-pitch-accent-anims][here]]. It's not
perfect, but it's usable.

The idea is to read the sentence on the front out loud, and then
compare what you said to the real audio. To make this comparison
easier, the back includes an animation of the pitch contour generated
with [[https://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat/][praat]] and the dictionary pitch of every word from the NHK accent
dictionary.
***  My results
Because pitch was fairly low priority for me before coming to Japan, I
only did around 5 new cards a day or so, and was never quite
consistent about it.

Currently, I have gone through around 1.5/2k cards in the deck. The
difficulty in being objective about anything language-learning-related
from a personal standpoint is that I have no clue what my results
would've looked like had I used any other method, like memorizing the
pitch of words individually.

One big success of the deck was that I was able to pick up pitch rules
quite intuitively and unconsciously. For instance, the rule that
transforms 尾高 words into 平板 words when they are succeeded by a の,
or the various rules that determined pitch accent transformations
across conjugations.

While my recall of individual words isn't great, when I have to use
them in context pronouncing the right pitch feels quite fluid and
natural. Of course, this is in part also because the words in the
pitch accent deck are fairly simple and I'm already able to use them
in the right /context/.

While the first 1.5k cards have definitely had big returns on my
accent, I quite often stumble while speaking because I'm trying to
recall the pitch of word that I'm sure I've seen. This involves kind
of replaying the word in my head with different pitches and listening
for which one "sounds" right. When this doesn't work, I usually just
ask someone or look it up on the spot. As you might imagine, most
people I talk to regularly are familiar with this behavior by now.

I'm quite sure that I make still make subtle pitch errors every other
sentence or so, and it gets worse the less standard the conversation
gets. Fortunately, a good chunk of the language that I use on a daily
basis is /extremely/ standard, so I make an effort to be confident in
the pitch of these phrases.

#+attr_html: :width 400px
[[../images/yokosuka.jpg]]

/横須賀市, Pentax MZ-10, Fujicolor 100/
